# Submission

Submission testing and guidelines for the BioDCASE-Tiny 2026 competition (Task 3)

> <font color="red">**Note:**</font> <br>
> We are still updating the submission procedure to make it easy for you to submit your work and easy for us to evaluate your submission!
> Wait for the submission at least **two weeks before the deadline of the challenge**. 
> Submission scores are fixed, but we would like to create a submission test on the '.zip' submission package still!

## ToDos:
- Finish this README
- Handle submission packages in .zip format
- Create a baseline score (on validation set?)
- Define ranking (point system based on thresholds? e.g. acc > 60: 1 pts, > 65: 2 pts), thresholds will be adapted once all submission results of participants are available.
  - Inference model:
    - Accuracy
    - ROC-AUC
    - MACS
    - Model size in bytes
  - Embedding model (tflite):
    - Accuracy
    - ROC-AUC
    - MACS
    - Model size in bytes
    - Ram usage
    - Feature extraction time
    - Model time
    - Total time
- Execute ranking on submission scores of all participants 

## How to Submit
A [submission package](#submission-package-format) ('.zip') has to be uploaded on the [biodcase submission webpage](https://biodcase.github.io/challenge2026/submission) by accessing the link to the CMT submission system.
Additionally, the submission webpage contains the general description of the submission format and provides the technical report templates.
The required system output for each solution (model instance) in the submission package is individual for each task.
For each solution (you are allowed to submit four solutions), we automatically compute submission scores and [rank](#ranking) the results for the competition.

### System Output
The system output is usually generated by the participant's models on an evaluation dataset that is presented before the end of the competition.
In this task however, the evaluation dataset stays hidden and the participants have to submit their **submission models and inference code**.
We therefore require:
- Inference model and inference code
- (optional) Embedding model (tflite)
- (optional) built embedded code (src)
- (alternative) Feature extraction algorithm that does not follow the baseline algorithm

### Submission Preparation for Inference Pipeline
Your solutions have to be adapted to our inference pipeline for automatic testing!
Following files and folders are used for our inference pipeline:
```
root/
...
├── feature_handler.py - (instantiated by inference_handler)
├── inference_handler.py - handles feature extraction and model
│
└── submission/
    ├── reports/ - generated, will contain your results
    ├── test_wav_files/ - test '.wav' files on which your model will be tested
    ├── your_generated_code/ - (optional) place your generated code (src) here
    ├── your_submission_model/ - place saved model files here (.pth or .keras, .tflite)
    │
    ├── config_submission.yaml - config of your submission
    ├── submission_test.py - pre-test your submission
    └── (your_lastname)_task3_(x).meta.yaml - template for system meta info
```
The inference pipeline is mainly handled by `./inference_handler.py` configured by `config_submission.yaml`.
Adapt the file `config_submission.yaml` to fit your model and feature extraction requirements:

```yaml
...
# inference handler - specify your submission model and feature extraction
inference_handler:

  # settings
  add_python_paths: []
  target_sample_rate: 24000
  target_wav_length_sec: 3
  model_dir: './your_submission_model'
  saved_model_extension: '.pth'
  tflite_model_extension: '.tflite'
  label_dict_yaml_path: './your_submission_model/label_dict.yaml'

  # feature handler
  feature_handler:
    module: feature_handler
    attr: FeatureHandler
    args: []
    kwargs: 
      target_sample_rate: 24000
      window_len: 4096
      window_stride: 512
      window_scaling_bits: 12
      mel_n_channels: 40
      mel_low_hz: 125
      mel_high_hz: 7500
      mel_post_scaling_bits: 6
      transpose_features_extracted: True
      normalize_features: True
      to_float: True
      add_channel_dimension: True
      add_batch_dimension: True
      channel_dimension_at_end: False

  # model
  model:
    module: pipeline_pytorch.model_tiny_ml
    attr: Baseline
    args: []
    kwargs: {}
...
```

The fields you likely have to adapt are:
- "saved_model_extension" - Either '.pth' for pytorch or '.keras' for tensorflow
- "feature_handler"
  - "kwargs" - settings of your feature extraction algorithm
- "model"
  - "module" - location of your model class
  - "attr" - model class name

If you have special requirements for your code generation adapt the following in `config_submission.yaml`:
```yaml
...
# generate embedded code
generate_embedded_code:

  # template directory
  template_dir: '../biodcase_tiny/embedded/firmware'

  # gen code dir
  gen_code_dir: './your_generated_code'
  gen_code_source_folder_name: 'src'

  # replace with your serial device
  serial_device: '/dev/ttyUSB0'

  # quantize
  quantize: False
```
You can also add your built 'src' folder in `gen_code_dir` folder and it will automatically skip the build process and use this source directly.


## Submission Testing
Please test your individual submission solutions before you upload your [submission package](#submission-package-format)!

Submission testing can be done by executing:
```bash
python submission_test.py
```
For demonstration we already placed demo model files, so that participants can run `submission_test.py` without changing anything.
But please note, that the demo model files have to be exchanged and `config_submission.yaml` adapted with your actual submission model for the challenge.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Our automatic testing algorithm evaluates each solution individually.
> Failing solutions will not be regarded for the upcoming results webpage!

## Submission Package Format
Similar to the [biodcase submission webpage](https://biodcase.github.io/challenge2026/submission) we require a `.zip` package with following structure:
```
biodcase_2026_task3_submission_package.zip/
├── (your_lastname)_task3.technical_report.pdf
├── (your_lastname)_task3_1/
│   ├── (your_lastname)_task3_1.meta.yaml
│   ├── config_submission.yaml
│   ├── <replacement or additional files>
│   │ 
│   ├── your_submission_model/
│   │   ├── label_dict.yaml
│   │   ├── <model_name>.pth or <model_name>.keras 
│   │   └── <model_name>.tflite (optional)
│   │
│   └── your_generated_code/
│        └── src (optional, but appreciated)
│
├── (your_lastname)_task3_2/ (optional)
│    ├── ...
│    ...
...       
```
where the `<replacement or additional files>` are custom files of participants either to replace an existing file by name or by adding a non-exiting file to the root directory of the test repository.
You can add up to four submission solution folders `(your_lastname)_task3_(x)` where 'x' is the instance of your solution.

## Ranking
The ranking is based on classification scores:
- Accuracy - Top-1 class accuracy,
- ROC-AUC - Receiver operating characteristic curve, area under the curve,

as well as efficiency scores:
- MACS - [Multiply–accumulate operation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiply%E2%80%93accumulate_operation)
- Model size in bytes
- Embedded scores on ESP32-S3:
  - Ram usage
  - Feature extraction time
  - Model time.

We evaluate both the inference model (e.g., pytorch, keras) as well as the embedding model (tflite).
This enables participants to be flexible in their model selection and not being restricted in requiring a embedding model.
However, the embedded scores are included in the total score of each participants and missing an embedded model will very much result in a lower ranking.

> <font color="violet">**Notice**</font> <br>
> Rankings are not everything! Important is the participation to the challenge and your contribution to TinyML for bird sound recognition:)
> Please have fun in this challenge and learn much! All the best, your challenge hosts.